Dear Dr. Adelmann,

The Editorial Office has received the decision on the paper entitled "A Fast
Parallel Poisson Solver on Irregular Domains Applied to Beam Dynamic
Simulations".

The reviewers' comments are as follows:
************************************************************ Reviewer #1: Report
on the paper

"A Fast Parallel Poisson Solver on Irregular Domains Applied to Beam Dynamic
Simulations"

by Adelmann, Arbenz and Ineichen

For beam dynamic simulations, it is necessary to solve Poisson's equation with
boundary conditions of third kind at each time step.  The large number of time
steps and small mesh sizes require a very fast parallel iterative solver for
Poisson's equation on non-rectangular domains. The paper studies two questions:
what discretization and iterative solver is suitable for such an application and
which software should be used. Since fast iterative solvers for Poisson's
equations on general domains are needed for several applications in
computational physics, the paper is relevant for COMP. PHYS. Furthermore, the
paper gives helpful hints about using software implementation issues.  However,
the numerical results and the choice of the discretization is not convincing.
The authors compare three kind of discretizations.  The most accurate is the
Shortly-Weller-discretization. It is well-known that this discretization is of
order O(h^2) in case of Dirichlet boundary conditions. However, the O(h)
consistency error at the boundary leads to an O(h) convergence in case of
boundary conditions of third kind.  The paper neglects this fact by presenting
numerical results only for Dirichelt boundary conditions. The O(h) consistency
error of the Shortly-Weller-discretization at the boundary is the reason, why
Finite Elements are widly used in case of boundary conditions of third kind.
Furthermore, the numerical results for the cg algorithm with aggregation based
AMG preconditioning are not very interesting, either.  The reason is that in
case of Dirichlet boundary conditions multigrid with geometric coarsening leads
to a fast iterative solver.  To implement such a multigrid algorithm is much
easier than aggregation based AMG. I recommend that the authers study the case
of non trivial boundary conditions of third kind in detail.  Futhermore, a
comparison with the computational amount of a standard geometric multigrid
algorithm on a unit cube would be helpful to see, how curvilinear bounded
domains increase computational time.


Reviewer #2: This paper discusses the application of algebriac multigrid
techniques to a PIC code for the simulation of electron beams. The formulation
of the equations gives rise to an electrostratic potential  Poisson problem that
must be repeatedly solved. The paper demonstrates the value of an approach that
is suitable for irregular domains as compared to a more traditional FFT based
approach. A number of algebraic multigrid options are discussed and relatively
good scalability is demonstrated.  Overall, the paper is well-written and
organized. The results illustrate tradeoffs associated with boundary treatment
as well as tradeoffs associated with parallel algebraic multigrid choices:
algebraic multigrid setup vs. reusing existing preconditioner (or part of an
existing preconditioner), stopping criteria, coarse level solver, and
scalability.  It should be noted that other choices such as the relaxation
scheme, the cycling method (V or W), and coarsening choices are not really
addressed, though it is unclear what impact they would have on the solution
time. However, in this aspect, this case study is certainly limited to a few
algebraic multigrid concerns. It might be nice to see some other algebraic
multigrid issues discussed.

The over-riding concern that I have is that the paper primarily boils down to
solving a Poisson problem in parallel with algebraic multigrid.  While the
results of the compuational experiments are illuminating, this is definitely not
a completely new subject. It is certainly embedded within a larger realistic
application and this is not a small accomplishment.  Overall, I feel that this
paper is a bit borderline for this journal in terms of the significance of this
contribution from an algorithm point of view.  

Minor Remarks 
=============

1) 'Preconditioning is inevitable for system ... since their condition number
increases as h^-2 '...

This is fairly general statement that is only valid for certain types of PDEs.
This should be properly qualified.

2) 'Independent of the application of multigrid methods the performance depends
on the choices ...'

The wording here is awkward.

3) Much of the material on pages 5-6 is fairly standard. It could perhaps be
condensed.

4) Large numbers such as 4,194,304 are usually separated with commas. In some
spots in the text quotes are used instead.

5) 'This results' should be changed to 'These results'. This sentence seems to
just hang by itself (in its own paragraph). It would be better to be a little
more explicit. For example, These results illustrate that an increase in
solution of approximately 2.3 in the best case is incurred in moving from an
FFT-based scheme to a more general approach. Of course, this more general
approach gives rise to increased accuracy when the domain has irregularities.

6) The results in Table 8 really don't show any big differences. The results can
be summarized in a few sentences without actually giving the data.

7) The construction times in Tables 9, 10, and 11 jump around. Specifically, it
appears that something bad has happened in the 2048 Table 10 results (which does
not occur for the 2048 core Table 11 data). Is there any data which explains
where this occurs and perhaps why?

8) On page 14, 'The solver employs on the conjugate ...'. The word 'on' should
be removed from this sentence.

9) On page 15, 'cpe' should be changed to 'cope'.


************************************************************

In view of these comments made the Associate Editor who guided your article,
Professor Knoll, has decided that the paper can be reconsidered for publication
after major revisions. Therefore we look forward to receiving the revised
version of the paper together with a reply to the reports and a summary of the
revisions made.

If the revised version is submitted within three months of receipt of this
e-mail, the manuscript will retain the original submission date. After three
months, your paper might be treated as a new submission and may be sent to new
reviewers.

Yours sincerely,

Jeanette Bakker on behalf of the Editors of Journal of Computational Physics

Editorial-Production Department, Elsevier Radarweg 29 1043 NX Amsterdam The
Netherlands

Tel: +31 20 485 3426 Fax: +31 20 485 2521 E-mail: jcp@elsevier.com



Journal of Computational Physics is available electronically at
http://www.ElsevierPhysics.com/

